# BME590L
ML Project for ML in Pharma Class
This is the final of the project submitted for my Machine Learning in Pharmacology class. 

Dataset is provided by http://thegleelab.org/AIPpred/index.html

Problem Description:

	Small molecule drugs for inflammatory diseases and autoimmune disorders suffer from significant off-target binding, which leads to clinically significant side effects and reduced therapeutic efficacy. A novel approach for targeting an inflammation-mediating receptor involves using an anti-inflammatory peptide (AIP) for a potent and specific biological response. Since so many conditions – including Alzheimer’s, cancer, and rheumatoid arthritis – are affected by aberrant inflammatory or immune responses, AIP-based therapy has the potential to revolutionize treatment and increase duration and quality of life for a large and diverse patient population.
	The challenge, therefore, comes in discovering or designing a potent, selective peptide that is effective in modulating an inflammatory or immune response. Multiple significant challenges remain in the field of peptide-based therapeutic discovery and development, and these must be addressed for an AIP to have a clinically-relevant response. These include potential cytotoxicity, large molecular size, poor membrane permeability, low metabolic stability, and rapid clearance.  Furthermore, since in vitro AIP discovery is time-consuming and expensive, a need arises for in-silico discovery methods. These methods are tasked with selecting the right combination of models and features to predict the activity of AIPs. Thus far, the few prediction models out there have been more classically based models (RF, SVM, etc). This leaves a lot to be desired, as new advancements in the field of machine learning lead to better technology that can be harnessed to answer pharmacological questions. For example, a dipeptide composition-based random forest model with 354 features was used to achieve an AUC value of .814 on an independent dataset.  By designing a new model, evaluating it, and comparing it with existing methods, we hope to increase the accuracy of computational AIP prediction and contribute to the development of AIP therapeutics.

The chosen modelling approach:

	Our group will be using a Deep Neural Network (DNN) and an ensemble model to model the Anti-Inflammatory Peptide dataset. Similar to the models used by the original author, our group’s models will use a binary classification to determine if a peptide is an AIP or a non-AIP.2 Our group will attempt to recreate the AIP data set used in the original paper. Similar to the original paper, our group will randomly select 80% of the data for a train set and 20% of the data for a test set.2 For the model that performs the best on our evaluation metrics, our group will create a surrogate LIME or decision tree model to better explain the predictions made by the selected model. 
	For the DNN classifier, our group will create a similar feedforward neural network to the one created by Aliper, Alexander et al..  Like the AIPred paper, our group will extract amino acid composition (AAC), amino acid index (AAI), dipeptide composition (DPC), chain-transition-composition (CTD), and physicochemical properties (PCP) from the peptide sequences.3 These relevant features will serve as the inputs for our DNN. Similar to the approach by Aliper, Alexander et al., our group will use a grid search for the optimization of the number of layers, number of hidden units, and the dropout rejection ratio used for our model.3 Cross entropy will be used as a cost function and AdaDelta will be used as a cost function optimizer. The hidden layers will utilize rectified linear activation functions and for the classification of the peptide sequence the output layer will utilize a softmax activation function.
	Our group also plans to implement an ensemble model similar to the one presented in the Ai et al. paper.4 Our model will consist of a Support Vector Machine (SVM), a Random Forest (RF), and an extreme gradient boosting model (XGB). Our group will try to replicate the optimization used in Ai et al. for parameter optimization.  Our group plans to use the same extracted features used for the DNN as inputs for our ensemble model. Each feature will be fitted to a SVM, RF, and XGB model and these models will be fused together by the averaging of the probabilities for each model’s prediction into one ensemble model that will predict the classification for the peptide sequence. There is potential to encounter a small trend that ML engineers have been noticing in recent years: the superiority of older, classical models over their newer counterparts . Intrigued with the idea of using a combination of simple models to achieve good results, we would like to see if an ensemble could outperform not only the machine learning approaches presented in the AIPpred paper but also our own DNN.

